the US Secretary of State has arrived in
Tel Aviv where he's expected to discuss
the terms of a potential deal between
Israel and Hamas to end the war on Gaza
Anthony blinkin says that he wants to
broker an extended pause to the war in
Gaza he's on his latest visit to the
Middle East where he's been meeting with
leaders across the
region blinkin has also held talks in
qatar's capital Doha and the katari
foreign minister says that he's
optimistic that an agreement is Within
Reach hash better
reports it's been a week that Hamas
received a proposal Qatar the key medior
hopes could lead to a new deal that may
end the war in Gaza free Israeli
captives and allow more Aid into the
strip qatar's prime minister Minister of
Foreign Affairs is confident an
agreement is Within
Reach we have received a reply from
Hamas on the general framework of the
agreement regarding the C captives the
reply includes some comments but in
general it is positive however given the
sensitivity of the issue we will not go
into details we are optimistic and we
have delivered the response to the
Israeli
party nice to see you US Secretary of
State Anthony blinkin remains cautious
he will have to convince the Israelis to
accept hamas's
terms but the Us official refrained from
talking about a ceasefire referring
instead to a pause we're also determined
to use any pause to continue to pave a
diplomatic path forward to a just and
Lasting peace and security for the
region that is the best way the best way
to ensure that October 7th and the
tragic loss of life by Israelis and
Palestinians is not
repeated Hamas which controls Gaza says
it has responded positively to the
negotiators Qatar and Egypt but insists
the deal must result in a permanent ceas
fire the proposal for a possible
agreement was presented to the leader of
hamas's political Bureau is in Doha but
it's the group's leader in Gaza Yahya
Sina along with alasan brigade's
Commander Muhammad daif who have the
ultimate say over any possible deal
by pushing for an agreement on Gaza the
US officials are keeping their eyes on
the broader goal convincing Saudi Arabia
the most powerful country in the region
to establish ties with Israel the Crown
Prince
reiterated Saudi Arabia's strong
interest in pursuing that uh but he also
made clear what uh he had said uh to me
before uh which is that in order to do
that uh two things are required uh um an
end to the conflict in
Gaza and a clear credible time-bound
path to the establishment of a
Palestinian
state but many remain skeptical they
accuse the US of siding with Israel Iran
and its allies warn if the war in Gaza
continues the Middle East risks being
mared by
instability Hashim
jazer all right let's uh bring in Rory
Chalin joining us from occupied East
Jerusalem to tell us what the next few
hours will look like for Secretary of
State Anthony
blinkin well he's got a lot of diplomacy
ahead of him first of all he's going to
be meeting with Benjamin Netanyahu then
he's going to be meeting with the
Israeli military Chief of Staff hery
halevi then he's going to be meeting
with the defense minister yav Galant uh
and after that uh he's going to be
meeting with the president isak Herzog
following that he's then going to rala
to the occupied West Bank and he's going
to meet be meeting with the Palestinian
president Mahmud abas so a lot on his
plate what he will be discussing uh
along the way is the Paris agreement
this deal uh and more specifically what
hamas's response uh to that deal has
been and he'll be trying to get a a read
from the Israelis about whether this is
is acceptable in any way to them now we
know that this Hamas response has been
passed through the ceries to the is uh
intelligence agency Mossad uh and that
it's being studied by the negotiators
what we don't know is what is in that
response the Israelis know it the
kataris know it the Americans know it we
don't but we have and I'll reiterate
what hashen was saying in his report
there what we do know is hamas's main
demand essentially is that any ceasefire
agreement ultimately will result in the
end of the war and the end of Israel's
uh Siege of of Gaza now the ceries are
optimistic that this deal is you know
something that that can be worked with
the Americans slightly less so uh if you
hear blinken he's saying that a deal is
necessary and possible Biden is saying
that he thinks that hamas's response is
slightly over the top and if you look at
the Israelis and what the Israelis are
saying well they are significantly more
negative than that uh and they think
that this deal at the moment is a
non-starter why is that Rory talk to us
a little bit more about the Israeli
response to any potential
deal well basically because you have
this huge Gulf between the Hamas
position and the Israel position the
Hamas position is that the war will end
with the culmination of the SE fires and
the exchange deals and the Israeli side
of things is to say no way like the war
for Netanyahu goes on until Israel has
achieved its War goals and let's remind
ourselves of what those War goals were
the eradication of Hamas as a military
threat to Israel basically to kick is
Hamas out of Gaza uh or uh to degrade
them so much so that they cannot ever
result in a threat ever again so you
know you can see that there is huge Gulf
a huge gap between those two positions
and Netanyahu and his government his
coalition government are pretty unified
on that the Israeli military is pretty
unified on this so politically and
militarily in Israel you have although
there are many differences about many
many different things you certainly do
have agreement that the war will not
finish with these these ceasefires so so
that's where we are and that's where the
Americans are going to try and bring two
sides together uh and get them to some
kind of uh agreement that that they
think is going to reorder the Middle
East uh and give say the Saudi Israeli
normalization deal a chance of getting
back on track again as we heard in
hash's package there his report the
Saudis are saying well this is
contingent on a two-state solution it's
contingent on a Palestinian State and
again that something that Benjamin
Netanyahu for most of his political
career has been actively trying to
prevent happening all right thank you
Rory challeng reporting from occupied
East Jerusalem we'll now cross over to
West Jerusalem and speak to manim Klein
who's a professor of political science
at barlan University Welcome T jaer
thanks for your time so as blinkin now
has arrived in Tel Aviv what will you be
looking out for as he takes up uh this
issue of a potential deal uh with uh
with the
Israelis
good morning uh it it depends on how far
assertive blinkin will be and which kind
of stick he will use on Netanyahu
definitely there is a huge gap between
Biden Administration and the Israeli
government Netanyahu is unwilling to end
the war and is unwilling is far far from
being on the same page with Biden
Administration regarding the
establishment of a Palestinian
State and the also there are thoughts in
the Israeli Administration to expand the
war north wise against healah sometime
in the spring so all these issues are
combined all together right and
Netanyahu yes yeah so look I mean you
said it depends which stick blinkin is
willing to use is he willing to use any
sort of Leverage at this point or I mean
talk us through the options on the table
for the US Administration on how to deal
with Netanyahu and his coalition
government today as it as the war stands
today regarding uh the war on
Gaza the Biden Administration can
express publicly not through Thomas
fredman its its stance and blame netan
for sabotaging and the uh the American
effort to help Israel he can make it uh
at the moment he choose to send messages
through Thomas fredman in the New York
in the New York Times uh Biden is Biden
interest is not to lose the elections
against Trump at the moment he it seems
that he's about to lose so the his uh
his interest is to actually to use the
stick and to beat netan netan interest
is to play on time and to mislead bid
then to promise something and then
regret to go for a partial deal and wait
for Trump win the elections netan does
not want to dissolve the government
netan does not want to make a deal a
prisoners exchange that will force the
radical right-wing parties to leave the
Coalition and then impose on netan early
elections in which it seems from public
opinion polls that is going to lose
right so what you're saying is Netanyahu
it's very possible that Netanyahu stalls
for simply for his own political
survival definitely and and it seems
that the American Administration prefers
to see somebody else in prime minister
office in Jerusalem what are you basing
that
on but it it seems to me that this is
the this is the American preference
through the messages coming out from the
White House through Thomas fredman and
the talk of the White House about the
two-state solution and the Saudis
normalizing its its relation with Israel
depend on the establishment of a
Palestinian state or a clear commitment
of the Israeli government to to this
goal of a Palestinian
State just just very briefly do do you
know I mean you say that the American
administ ation would want to see someone
else in that position um
who I I assume that they they prefer a c
Central life candidate like gun who is
the who is a leading person in Israeli
public opinion polls okay thank you
manim Klein thank you for joining us
from West Jerusalem thank
you